README.md, before:

# DataVisualizationProject
#### Background 
Recently I heard a news regarding equal pay for both male and female, which made me more interested in this issue. I wondered if culture or other issues caused the gender wage gap.   

### Summary
Gender Wage Gap Project  - Using Data visualization to see different countries' median gender wage gap in the 21st Century.
    - 1 The top 2 countries that have the largest gender wage gap (Korea and Japan) might be due to culture issues - Male chauvinism for example.  
    - 2 New Zealand seems to have the lowest percentage across the years.  Although Hungry had the lowest percentage for a few years,  it also had a few years that were more than 10%.
    - 3 Most of the countries' gender wage gap between male and female was between 10% and 25%.
    - 4 Although many countries' gap were showing decreasing, it seemed Western Europe and Northern Europe countries had more steady rate of decreasing.

### Design
1.	Data Selection – I decided to pick the data that is from OECD Data about Gender Wage gap https://data.oecd.org/earnwage/gender-wage-gap.htm.  When I saw the map, it looked similar to the D3 lesson that about World Cup.  But it also made me interested and wanted to answer the question - “Will gender wage gap depend on the country that is labeled as first World, developing country, or will other cultural background affect the gender wage gap?”  Especially recently I heard on the news about the equal pay for both male and female.  It maked me even more interested in this issue.
2.	Map Data – I used the files (world_countries.json) and codes that was supplied during lesson 4 to draw the map for my visualization.
3.	After creating the map, I realized that my original data set (GenderWageGap_00_12.csv) only has a field of country codes.  If I wanted to indicate the location on the map, I needed to add the location information to the data set.  After some online research, I decided to add 3 fields to the updated data file (GenderWageGap_00_12_geo.csv)  – country name, longitude and latitude for the capital city of the country.  So later on if I want to add a bubble indicator, it will be located on the capital city for that country.
4.	I was having difficulties to figure out how to use D3 to combine the map and data to create the visualization.  SO I decided to go with easier graphs.  I was wondering if I can recreate the line chart that the web site provided.  The reason I selected line chart is because I can use this data set which can be groupped in 2 ways – either by Years then Country, or Countries then by Years.  I would like to show the first method.  It can tell the difference how each country gender wage gap changed throughout each year.  And it also can show the difference of how countries changed for each year.
5.	After creating the multi-line charts, I added different colors to each country in the data set.  There were 36 countries, and 334 lines of data.  I saw one of the multi-lines examples showing both animation and interaction through the legend.  I decided to use this idea as my interactive with user.
6.	Legend - Since there was 36 countries in the dataset, if I list all of them in one row or column, it would be really confusing.  So I turned them into the 3 rows of legend that is below the main graph.  It also acted as keys for user to interact.
7.	Interact -  I saw one example use bootstrap to show to 2 graphs on the same screen, so I decided to use this idea to show my interactive graph.
     * User can hover the scatter plot point to see the information.  However, since there was more than 300 points on the graph, and it is difficult to see one country's data.  
     * User can click on the country code legend to see more detail for that country:
          - show the bar graph with each individual value (below the main graph)
          - the line that belongs to the selected country will be enhanced (thicker than other)

*(update for Version 2) 

8. Make line in the line graph thinner and more opacity, and change the bottom graph smaller.
9. Update the name for country code.  So when a user clicks the country code in the legend table, in the area 2 header, it shows the country name and code, especially for the code that is really different than the country name.
10.  After modified the all, I think I need to make it more explanatory instead of exploratory graph.  So I redesign for the whole graph for version 3.

* (Update for version 3)

11.  Instead of legend show the country code, it will display continent names that I separated it to 7 of them.  It will reflect in the scatter plot's dots.
12.  Update the hover information to add country name to it.
13.  Instead of bar graph for each country, it will display line chart for each continent alongs in the countries in that continent.
14.  Remove the line chart in the main graph to show only data points - to avoid dense and clutter.
 
### Feedback
Questions for feed back response:
  * (Q1) What do you notice in the visualization?
  * (Q2) WHat questions do you have about the data?
  * (Q3) What relationships do you notice?
  * (Q4) What do you think is the main takeaway from this visualization?
  * (Q5) Is there something you don't understand in the graph?
  
##### Version 1 
1. A High school girl (my daughter):
    - (Q1) The gender wage gap between men and women is increaseing for some countries and decreasing for others.
    - (Q2) Why does every country have a similiar trend of going up/down?
    - (Q3) They all have a similar trend.
    - (Q4) Not enough knowledge to make statement
    - (Q5) I don't know why this topic is significant to the people of today.
2. My spouse:
    - (Q1) band of items are similar, result of common background, contrast?
    - (Q2) missing data points, important? outlier?
    - (Q3) a few are close to 0%, then drift up.
    - (Q4) wide spread of gaps ,median unknow.
    - (Q5) How does the difference show the women's earnings gap? What is the mathematics formula to calculate the percentage?
3. Amir (Udacity):
    - (Q1) I notice a very dense visualization
    - (Q2) How come Hungary took decreased significantly in 2003?
    - (Q3) I notice that KOR has the worst gender wage gap.
    - (Q4) That wage gaps are decreasing over time
    - (Q5) I don't understand the bar graphs at the bottom. They seem to be the same as the line graph above. How come you don't simply dim the other lines, add labels to the points when one country's line is selected?
4. Lucille (friend):
    - (Q1) Because there are such a large number of countries represented, the line graph has so many lines the data is a little hard to distinguish without selecting the countries one at a time.  You can see a trend that while there is some improvement, the percentage of median wage gap is generally flat for the 12 year period.  The ability to select the bar chart for individual countries is helpful.
    - (Q2) 
        *What types of jobs do these wages represent?  professional, blue collar, etc.
        *Where are the jobs located?  Are they in the big cities or elsewhere in the countries.
        *Was there a specific age group of men and women that was used?  Education level?
    - (Q3) The most obvious is the large wage gaps in Korea and Japan.  Because the country codes were not clear to me, I am not sure if other Asian countries had the same trend.  In general, the gaps in most countries seem to be lessening, however slowly.
    - (Q4) There is a worldwide wage gap between men and women, not specific to any particular country, although the size of the gap varies quite a bit.  It also shows that the gaps are not being closed very rapidly; only a few percentage points at best over the 12 year period.
    - (Q5) I believe I understand the graph and data, but I do not know all the country codes.

##### Response to version 1 Feedback
Because I do not know how the data was collected and calculated, I really cannout explain why some countries have dramatic difference between years.  When I download the data, it already included the calculated percentage values. 

### Resources
1.	OECD (2015), Gender wage gap (indicator). doi: 10.1787/7cee77aa-en (Accessed on 10 October 2015)
http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/employment/gender-wage-gap/indicator/english_7cee77aa-en?isPartOf=/content/indicatorgroup/4ead40c7-en
2.	D3 Lesson – World Cup Example Codes.
3.	D3noob’s blocks http://bl.ocks.org/d3noob
4.	Multi-Series Line Chart http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/3884955
5.	Building a Multi-Line Chart Using D3.js: Part 2 http://code.tutsplus.com/tutorials/building-a-multi-line-chart-using-d3js-part-2--cms-22973
6.	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Developing_country
7.	http://www.delimited.io/blog/2014/3/3/creating-multi-series-charts-in-d3-lines-bars-area-and-streamgraphs
8.	http://bl.ocks.org/phoebebright/raw/3176159/
9.	Small Multiples mbostock’s block #1157787 August 19, 2011 http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/1157787
10.	Multi-line graph with automatic legend and toggling show / hide lines.
 http://www.d3noob.org/2014/07/d3js-multi-line-graph-with-automatic.html

Commit message:

Add notes to Version 4 & 5 Redesign notes, Version 3 review.

README.md, after:

# DataVisualizationProject
#### Background 
Recently I heard a news regarding equal pay for both male and female, which made me more interested in this issue. I wondered if culture or other issues caused the gender wage gap.   

### Summary
Gender Wage Gap Project  - Using Data visualization to see different countries' median gender wage gap in the 21st Century.
    - 1 The top 2 countries that have the largest gender wage gap (Korea and Japan) might be due to culture issues - Male chauvinism for example.  
    - 2 New Zealand seems to have the lowest percentage across the years.  Although Hungry had the lowest percentage for a few years,  it also had a few years that were more than 10%.
    - 3 Most of the countries' gender wage gap between male and female was between 10% and 25%.
    - 4 Although many countries' gap were showing decreasing, it seemed Western Europe and Northern Europe countries had more steady rate of decreasing.

### Design
1.	Data Selection – I decided to pick the data that is from OECD Data about Gender Wage gap https://data.oecd.org/earnwage/gender-wage-gap.htm.  When I saw the map, it looked similar to the D3 lesson that about World Cup.  But it also made me interested and wanted to answer the question - “Will gender wage gap depend on the country that is labeled as first World, developing country, or will other cultural background affect the gender wage gap?”  Especially recently I heard on the news about the equal pay for both male and female.  It maked me even more interested in this issue.
2.	Map Data – I used the files (world_countries.json) and codes that was supplied during lesson 4 to draw the map for my visualization.
3.	After creating the map, I realized that my original data set (GenderWageGap_00_12.csv) only has a field of country codes.  If I wanted to indicate the location on the map, I needed to add the location information to the data set.  After some online research, I decided to add 3 fields to the updated data file (GenderWageGap_00_12_geo.csv)  – country name, longitude and latitude for the capital city of the country.  So later on if I want to add a bubble indicator, it will be located on the capital city for that country.
4.	I was having difficulties to figure out how to use D3 to combine the map and data to create the visualization.  SO I decided to go with easier graphs.  I was wondering if I can recreate the line chart that the web site provided.  The reason I selected line chart is because I can use this data set which can be groupped in 2 ways – either by Years then Country, or Countries then by Years.  I would like to show the first method.  It can tell the difference how each country gender wage gap changed throughout each year.  And it also can show the difference of how countries changed for each year.
5.	After creating the multi-line charts, I added different colors to each country in the data set.  There were 36 countries, and 334 lines of data.  I saw one of the multi-lines examples showing both animation and interaction through the legend.  I decided to use this idea as my interactive with user.
6.	Legend - Since there was 36 countries in the dataset, if I list all of them in one row or column, it would be really confusing.  So I turned them into the 3 rows of legend that is below the main graph.  It also acted as keys for user to interact.
7.	Interact -  I saw one example use bootstrap to show to 2 graphs on the same screen, so I decided to use this idea to show my interactive graph.
     * User can hover the scatter plot point to see the information.  However, since there was more than 300 points on the graph, and it is difficult to see one country's data.  
     * User can click on the country code legend to see more detail for that country:
          - show the bar graph with each individual value (below the main graph)
          - the line that belongs to the selected country will be enhanced (thicker than other)

* (update for Version 2) 

8. Make line in the line graph thinner and more opacity, and change the bottom graph smaller.
9. Update the name for country code.  So when a user clicks the country code in the legend table, in the area 2 header, it shows the country name and code, especially for the code that is really different than the country name.
10.  After modified the all, I think I need to make it more explanatory instead of exploratory graph.  So I redesign for the whole graph for version 3.

* (Update for version 3)

11.  Instead of legend show the country code, it will display continent names that I separated it to 7 of them.  It will reflect in the scatter plot's dots.
12.  Update the hover information to add country name to it.
13.  Instead of bar graph for each country, it will display line chart for each continent alongs in the countries in that continent.
14.  Remove the line chart in the main graph to show only data points - to avoid dense and clutter.

* (Update Version 4 & 5)
15. Redesign the first graph - instead of showing each country's datapoint, change to each continent's average datapoint per year.
16. Because the difficulty of parse time (%Y) and calculated the position of datapoints correctly, so for the main graph, it changed to interger instead of time format for the X-axis.

### Feedback
Questions for feed back response:
  * (Q1) What do you notice in the visualization?
  * (Q2) WHat questions do you have about the data?
  * (Q3) What relationships do you notice?
  * (Q4) What do you think is the main takeaway from this visualization?
  * (Q5) Is there something you don't understand in the graph?
  
##### Version 1 
1. A High school girl (my daughter):
    - (Q1) The gender wage gap between men and women is increaseing for some countries and decreasing for others.
    - (Q2) Why does every country have a similiar trend of going up/down?
    - (Q3) They all have a similar trend.
    - (Q4) Not enough knowledge to make statement
    - (Q5) I don't know why this topic is significant to the people of today.
2. My spouse:
    - (Q1) band of items are similar, result of common background, contrast?
    - (Q2) missing data points, important? outlier?
    - (Q3) a few are close to 0%, then drift up.
    - (Q4) wide spread of gaps ,median unknow.
    - (Q5) How does the difference show the women's earnings gap? What is the mathematics formula to calculate the percentage?
3. Amir (Udacity):
    - (Q1) I notice a very dense visualization
    - (Q2) How come Hungary took decreased significantly in 2003?
    - (Q3) I notice that KOR has the worst gender wage gap.
    - (Q4) That wage gaps are decreasing over time
    - (Q5) I don't understand the bar graphs at the bottom. They seem to be the same as the line graph above. How come you don't simply dim the other lines, add labels to the points when one country's line is selected?
4. Lucille (friend):
    - (Q1) Because there are such a large number of countries represented, the line graph has so many lines the data is a little hard to distinguish without selecting the countries one at a time.  You can see a trend that while there is some improvement, the percentage of median wage gap is generally flat for the 12 year period.  The ability to select the bar chart for individual countries is helpful.
    - (Q2) 
        *What types of jobs do these wages represent?  professional, blue collar, etc.
        *Where are the jobs located?  Are they in the big cities or elsewhere in the countries.
        *Was there a specific age group of men and women that was used?  Education level?
    - (Q3) The most obvious is the large wage gaps in Korea and Japan.  Because the country codes were not clear to me, I am not sure if other Asian countries had the same trend.  In general, the gaps in most countries seem to be lessening, however slowly.
    - (Q4) There is a worldwide wage gap between men and women, not specific to any particular country, although the size of the gap varies quite a bit.  It also shows that the gaps are not being closed very rapidly; only a few percentage points at best over the 12 year period.
    - (Q5) I believe I understand the graph and data, but I do not know all the country codes.

##### Response to version 1 Feedback
Because I do not know how the data was collected and calculated, I really cannout explain why some countries have dramatic difference between years.  When I download the data, it already included the calculated percentage values. 

##### Feedback from Version 3 (Also submitted as project review)
1. From Amir (Udacity):
"Good work. I like how you grouped regions of countries together. Did you think of using a choropleth for your visualization?
Also, I like your line graph better than the top graph. I would suggest using that in place of the point graph or possibly average the regions together and have the bottom graph as a detail graph?"

### Resources
1.	OECD (2015), Gender wage gap (indicator). doi: 10.1787/7cee77aa-en (Accessed on 10 October 2015)
http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/employment/gender-wage-gap/indicator/english_7cee77aa-en?isPartOf=/content/indicatorgroup/4ead40c7-en
2.	D3 Lesson – World Cup Example Codes.
3.	D3noob’s blocks http://bl.ocks.org/d3noob
4.	Multi-Series Line Chart http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/3884955
5.	Building a Multi-Line Chart Using D3.js: Part 2 http://code.tutsplus.com/tutorials/building-a-multi-line-chart-using-d3js-part-2--cms-22973
6.	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Developing_country
7.	http://www.delimited.io/blog/2014/3/3/creating-multi-series-charts-in-d3-lines-bars-area-and-streamgraphs
8.	http://bl.ocks.org/phoebebright/raw/3176159/
9.	Small Multiples mbostock’s block #1157787 August 19, 2011 http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/1157787
10.	Multi-line graph with automatic legend and toggling show / hide lines.
 http://www.d3noob.org/2014/07/d3js-multi-line-graph-with-automatic.html
